# Haskell CI Group Notes

* **Thursday, November 9 2023**

Haskell reliability was the theme of the call.

Stability of recent GHC major versions, in particular.

I have noticed a disconnect in the general vibe felt among GHC users compared to
the concrete issues reported upstream. Some people report entire major versions
as unusable, and yet as I watch GHC HQ triage issues, I see them promptly solve
nearly every problem that is brought to their attention. Something seems to be
missing. Can we bridge the information gap somehow? Is it just a faulty
perception, or are important issues not getting raised upstream?

Jack suggested it would be nice if there was a way to encourage users to try
things out and pass reports back upstream. Ironically, the very next day, Cabal
maintainers decided to do a very similar thing, which culminated in their [call
for Windows testers][cabal-win]. But for Cabal, the request is clear: run
*these* tests against *that* Cabal version. GHC doesn't have the same
infrastructure yet.

That is one argument for ensuring bindist tests are reliable. But that requires
making tests reliable, full stop. And there's only so much GHC HQ can do if
they don't have access to whatever exotic architecture on which a problem
arises.

Another option is to turn https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/head.hackage into a
user-facing utility: *Download this tarball and run the tests and report the
results*. I personally can imagine having a "GHC@Home" program that packages all
of this up real pretty. It would be great to get a really wide set of data on
running GHC on real environments in all sorts of places. It wouldn't replace the
testsuite, but would augment it. The testsuite could be 100% rock-solid and it
would still benefit from real-world reports.

Another project to put in my "maybe" list...

The final option we discussed was to make GHC Nightlies reliable, and then give
users a clear set of steps to try building their packages with it and reporting
results. This would work especially well for smaller packages with a smallish
set of dependencies. But don't worry, making GHC Nightlies reliable was
*already* on my "maybe" list.

The mic drop of the year award goes to... was it Jack or Andrea? I already
forgot! On the subject of GHC triage, they said it would be nice to see a
summary of the weekly triage meetings. That was such a good idea that I
immediately resolved to start doing so. The first one will be published soon.

[cabal-win]: https://discourse.haskell.org/t/cabal-is-looking-for-qa-testers-on-the-windows-platform/8103)
